The fall of 1944,
when you and many of your classmates knew you were
going on active duty, did you all still take your
academics seriously? Not as seriously as we
probably should. Some did. Some of the young ones
particularly, you know, I don't know. But
you did go to class every day? We did go to class. I
always went to class. It was the easiest way to get
by. I mean, I have a good memory. I retained what
people say, take a couple of notes, and I could come
back and do it. It was just so much easier than
trying to dig it up on your own and have the
professor tell you, and learn from the professor.
Now, had you already officially joined the Marine
Corps? Second semester, yes. Second semester.
Second semester. August, just when the first
semester was over in August, I joined the Corps.
All right, and you volunteered for the Marine
Corps because of your brother. Because of my
brother. He's a historian, and you're a
historian. I'm a multiple selection guy. A, my
brother. B, I don't like cold weather, and I knew
that the Europe was cold. C, I didn't want to wear
wool next to my skin, and I knew the Army would make
you wear wool shirts next to your skin. D, I'd
rather kill a Jap than kill a blond-headed,
blue-eyed German who might be my cousin.
My father knew people at the replacement, or the
drives where you first went in down in San Antonio,
and I had a cousin that went through there and went
into OCS, and everybody said my father did it for
him. And if I did anything, I wanted to do it in my own
name and not have my father get credit for it as then
a lieutenant colonel in the Army.
So I'm of multiple causes. Why did I do it? I wanted
to replace my brother. I wanted to kill jobs. I
wanted to, if I had to kill anybody, I didn't want to
go into, I didn't want to get my feet cold and get
frostbite and stuff like that. So all those
reasons are there. I'm from Orange County. And the
Kishi family, which produced a number of Aggies,
some of whom were real World War II heroes, were
there any Japanese-American students at A&M? I
don't remember seeing them. I've never heard of
any during the war. I've never heard of them.
Right. That fall, you're still treated as fish,
and so you still have to clean things up. Yeah. and
there were
run details, and there were yell practices, but
you all did not march into the game. After the game,
when the Aggies won, did you still throw the yell
leaders into the pond? I don't remember doing
that. I don't remember doing that. I don't
remember the pond, as a matter of fact. Did many
people come to the games? No. Because gas was
tough. Gas was tough. If they ever got 38,000
there, it was a huge, big crowd. And sometimes they
came on the train? Oh, yeah. And the big thing
that's changed for that whole era is going to the
game was a social event. Men wore jackets and ties,
and women wore dresses and corsages and silk
stockings and silk hose. And all the games were day
games. And all the games were day games. And it was a
time to get together in the YMCA. You couldn't get
through the YMCA hardly at all. It was crowded.
Crowded. And so it was a good experience. Did
anybody take any strong drinks to games? Oh, yes.
Much more. drunkenness in those days than there is
today. Where did Aggies buy their drinks?
Neither my father, mother, nor I drank. So I don't
know. They just had them. There were a lot of
advertising lights stopped outside of Waco to get
beer and so forth. I know that Austin was the
smallest town where you could buy, where they had a
university where you could buy beer. And all the
games were day games. All the games were day games,
and the band was there. Did you go on court trips
during the war? Yeah, hitchhiking. One of them, a
friend of mine, we had a walk-on quarterback from
Plainview taking in Bob Horn. They went to Naval
Academy and started a quarterback there in the
fall of 1949. And Bob Lane, my roommate and I, were
hitching, and our suitemates from Hearn came by
and they had a two-seat coupe. And they said, well,
if we would ride the truck, and if we would go by to
see Hearn play Franklin on Friday night, they
would take us to Dallas in the coupe, in the trunk of
the coupe. We said, that's a deal. And we got in the
trunk of the coupe and drove up to Franklin and saw
the Hearn-Franklin football game and got back in
it. And we put a two-by-four to hold it back. They
lived openly. Well, we hit a bump, and the
two-by-four went flying, and the lid came down,
and it wasn't dangerous or anything like that, but
the guy driving the car named Lawson or Cornforth,
kind of gigantic pull-in for guys, he pulled in and
told the attendant to check his spare tire, you
know, and the attendant opened it, and it was three
bodies, and all of them were pretty big guys, and he
opened that thing, and there were three bodies,
and he jumped back, But we drove up to Ornby and saw
the game at Ornby Stadium. And
yeah, we went on court trips. And of course, you
know, I'm sure you write and meet the girls from
TSCW there in Dallas at the court trips. And one
time I met a very fine girl there named Pam Burgess,
who had apparently a skill, a pretty good pianist.
She had played in Boston and going She played in the
Governor's Mansion. And when I say this, there's
nothing of color in any of this. The thing I would
say about A&M then and A&M today, the surface
morality was much higher then than it is now. But
the spirituality is much greater now than it was
then. There was much more real commitment today to
spiritual things than there was then. It was a kind
of a surface. Everybody is Christian. There's a
Christian country, so you're born into
Christianity, cultural rather than personal.
And on those court trips, as you all marched down
the street and so forth, how did the observers
respond? a very patriotic era. Later on, I knew a
mother who said she always wanted her son to come to
A&M. She had two sons that went to Baylor, and they
were athletes. And her third son came to A&M, and
she was thrilled that he didn't go to Baylor. They
were from Waco. And he's an athlete called for him
at A&M now. And she wanted, because it was
patriotic. And everybody in the 30s in that time,
well by the time I got here of course we were in the
war, but in the 30s everybody knew we were going to
soon be in war. And the advantage of A&M also at that
time was getting the reserve commission gave you
an extra degree of economic security. When my dad
was on CC duty, we knew a lot of graduate engineers.
who until they were called active duty were
pumping gas to put money into the family. They were
just literally out there and servicing cars,
changing oil and things like that as graduate
engineers. But they were called active duty as
lieutenants and captains. And it was another
security element for them. And A&M grew in
enrollment. The golden years of A&M in many ways
was that late 1930s with the war coming on and the
Depression and cheap education. Describe, if you
can, that fall semester or the summer, first
Silver Taps and then Bonfire as it was held then in
those days. Silver Taps was held whenever any one
individual was killed, died, or something. And it
was very similar to what they do today, except
probably just as somber and you know, and the one
thing that I pictured as different is they had the
silver taps from the top of the academic building
and then another one further away and then another
one further away, so you've got an echo effect. Oh,
really? Yeah. It was very, very, very, much more
moving than it is today, because they'd play, this
one would start and then this one would start and
then that one would start. You'd turn out all the
lights and things like that, and we'd all march, we
would March down there, it was something you would
go to. Did anybody not take it seriously? Nothing,
no. No pranks? No pranks. And when you got back to
the dorm, appropriate seriousness?
Yeah, yeah, yeah. I don't recall any, and if
somebody said something, I mean, I'm not saying, I
just don't. I've never heard of any. Now, Bonfire
was in the drill field, and we'd go out, and we'd cut
the logs, We had no moving equipment, except
trucks. Were there some logs in 44? Yeah. Oh,
really? Yeah, we'd go out and cut the logs. And my
shoulders got scraped and everything else. We'd
hold them on our shoulders, carry them to the
truck, put them on the truck. The truck would bring
them here, and then we would bring them in. And it's
just a TP effect, one layer. About how long
chronologically did you all work on the bonfire? A
week, a month? I'd say a week and 10 days. Not that
long. All right. And so they had quit by 1944. They
had quit putting trash wood. Yeah. There was some
trash on it, but basically it was a teepee effect of
trees. Of logs. Because, see, in the late 30s, they
used quite often the wood crating and so forth from
the railroad. Right. It was a burning up of trash.
Yeah. All right. So it's held on the drill. But the
thing is that we did not have a crange to lift up.
Yeah. all that stuff. We don't understand why they
can't go back to that. It was relatively safe. Who
did the cutting? Freshmen. Freshmen. I think we
did, but I know we did the carrot. And you used
two-man saws? Yeah, and axes. And axes. Do you
remember any injuries? No, except scratch on
Ray's shoulders. But nobody got a leg cut off or a
hand or anything like that? There ain't no power
saws. Did anybody attempt any kind of pranks, any
outsider, with Bonfire? What year was that that
the Texas tribe had come over? Oh, no, that's
later. That's later. That's the only thing I
remember, no. It would have been worth somebody's
life if we were friends. I mean, it was... What were
you all told that Bonfire symbolized? What did it
represent? We didn't make a big deal out of it,
really. Nothing. Was there much of a crowd? A long
time. No, I mean, just cadets. All right, then you
go home at the end of the semester, which would have
been late January. Well, I didn't go home. See, I
went to the Marines. No, but the semester is over,
and you reported for active duty. Yeah, active
duty to the Marines. All right, briefly summarize
your active duty service. Okay, I went to the
Marines, and they gave me the... responsibility
of getting about six guys from San Antonio to
Atlanta, Georgia with an eight day, eight hour
layover in New Orleans and I sweated that one out
getting back on that train in New Orleans. I went to
Atlanta. In Atlanta they put us on another train. I
lost my responsibility and my authority and
became another Munich and we went to Parris Island
and there they put us on cattle cars, bus,
semi-trucks, and drove us in to Parris Island,
where we were met by a legend in the Marine Corps in
World War II, covered in Time magazine, Sergeant
Lou Diamond. And he was a goatee to the guy, using
all kinds of profanity and everything else. I was
six feet three, weighed about 155 pounds, and was
in excellent shape from my freshman year at A&M,
from running mile and seven-tenths and other
things that we did here. And... The biggest
adjustment I had in boot camp was I was taken out of
my socioeconomic level, geographic
socioeconomic level, and thrown in with a bunch of
people that were totally different culturally
from me, all the way from an illiterate from
Alabama, whom I was supposed to teach the General
Orders, and I said, First General, take charge of
this post. When we took charge and I had to try to
explain to him, they pulled him out, thank
goodness, to people from the scum that scraped off
the streets of New York City, real scumbags. And
the language they used was different from what
I've been used to. I never heard the word scum. The
name of Jesus Christ taken as an oath, you know, it
was something we, damn hell, a lot of other things,
but not, that was not something you would use in the
South. You never heard said that. I was designated
a acting squad leader by, platoon leader, you'll
be interested in this, was one Shelby Foote, who
had a strange background. He had been cashiered
out of the Army as a captain. I don't know if you know
this about Shelby Foote. No. He had something
happen in North Ireland. In the height of the war,
he had been booted out of the Army as an
uncommissioned officer and was dragged to enlist
in the Marines as a private. I wonder if that's in
the standard biography of Foote. No, I don't think
so. I called him and just talked to him a little bit,
you know, after I got my doctorate in history. But
he, and then presumably there were B-12 types
who'd been bumped out of B-12 programs or
something. How well prepared had your A&M
experience made you for those responsibilities?
Oh, very much so. Very much so. Particularly, I
gained 30 pounds at Marine Corps boot camp.
Physically, it was very easy. Psychologically,
having to adjust to the new culture was pretty
tough. When I was at Bukank, they called me over and
said, we're going to go to second phase. After
second phase, would you be interested in going to
Japanese language school, which studies your
tests? And by
this time, the romance of the Marine Corps and the
adventure had kind of worn off. And I like to be a
student. I like to go to school. I love to go to
school. And yeah, I'd be interested in it. I went to
second phase training, which was good. It was not
bad. And then they asked me to, I had to go before a
board to tell them why I wanted to go to Jet League.
And I lied like a trooper and talked my way into it,
where apparently a fellow by the name of Robert
Bork was there at the same time, because I heard
them ask him, where were you when the atomic bomb
went off? And he said, Japanese language school in
the Marine Corps in Cancun, June. And that's where
I was. And very small, so I had to see him. But we both
came to probably 50 pounds since those days. He
wasn't a best friend, don't misunderstand me. But
I didn't know him. He must have been there. I must
have seen him. And then after the war was over, as
soon as the war was over, I forget that going to
Japan and speaking the language. I said, I want to
get out of this. And so I went. flunked out of
Japanese language school, to put it bluntly. I
didn't try at all. And so then they sent me to combat
intelligence school, then I went to Quantico,
rifle range coaching school, I was always, they
kept putting me in school. Then finally, in a
brigade, first special marine brigade, we went on
maneuvers down off of Puerto Rico, out of Calibra,
then on Puerto Rico. And then they brought us back
up on the transport into New York Harbor, sailed up
Hudson River to 125th Street. And in order to get
$300 mustering out pay, rather than $200, you had
to be overseas for one month or more. And they kept
us on that boat for 32 days, for two days over a
month. Of those two days, we were on the boat,
theoretically. But we were in New York for eight
days. Four days, they let us have leave. And then
the other two days, they gave us overnight passes.
So out of those eight days, six days was a leave or
pass. And you go into New York and get free tickets
to South Pacific, Big Dog Baby, Red Mill, free
tickets to baseball games, Yankee baseball
games,
nickel hot dogs, free Pepsi Cola in Times Square. I
stayed at the Taft Hotel at 42nd Avenue and 7th
Avenue and 42nd Street. 7th Avenue and 42nd
Street. And the room was $7 a night. Vincent Moe
plays, playing for your dancing pleasure in the
ballroom, $7 a night. And I remember I... Got on the
subway. It was an elevator at that point, 125th
Street, Old Morrison, Texas. And I never thought I
was on anything going so fast when I went down
underground. You know, it's so close, it's going
by. And I got off at 42nd Street and Broadway, a
junction there, and got up and knew where the
tagged hotel was. A fellow from up in that area told
me about the tag. And I walked up to it, got there,
and I said, can you tell me where Times Square is?
Because I'd been listening to radio at Little
Theater on Times Square and all this thing. And I
figured it was just kind of like Alhambra or like
Camelot or something, just a gorgeous, glorious
place. And they said, well, where did you come
from? I said, I got off at Subway right
there. And they said, well, you walked right
across it on the way here. And all I saw was orange
juice sales and things like that. And so it was
funny. And so then I went back to Quantico,
Virginia, and waited out until my points built up
and got discharged. And when I was in, and when I
was, my wife will get it. When I was in, for a while I
was a transient and had no assigned duties. And
they'd keep us busy. And I got to be perfect at
avoiding that. We'd fall out about four ranks. I
always get the last rank, have a clipboard, and
then call my name. As soon as they called my name,
I'd be all the way here. I'd step back one step, walk
along the formation all the way, very official
looking, not try to hide, walk right in front of all
the non-coms, and go over to the library and the
snag bar. They were in the same building. And read
and listen to the jukebox and listen to... Doris
Day sang Sentimental Journey and dreamed about
getting on that train, counting every mile of
railroad track that takes me back to Texas.
But I got to be really good at avoiding these make
jobs. But I didn't get in trouble. I read
trigonometry. It was a history of Texas
government in the West. It was the first time I
heard of John Wesley Hardin. When I came home, I
asked my grandfather, Paudie, did you ever hear of
John Wesley? Oh, no, I saw him. And I think he's
dead, too. He said he and his father were coming
through, and John Wesley was riding a horse, and
his father was driving a wagon that came down to a
ford here across the Brazos River. And there was a
deputy sheriff there. And the deputy sheriff
pretended he didn't recognize John Wesley
Horton. And so he didn't try to do anything, and he
went peacefully on his way. Now, was this the Aggie
grandfather? Grandfather, yeah. Now, did he tell
you anything about his attitude when you became an
Aggie? Did he say anything to you about A&M? The
only thing he had said, that if any grandson of his
ever became the captain of the Texas A&M football
team, he would give them 200 acres of land. Now, his
great-great-grandson
started for... the Aggies in the Cotton Bowl
against Auburn. His name was Wiley. He was his
son's daughter's, his son's, no, his
granddaughter's, his son's son's daughter's
son. Randy Wiley started at guard.
under Jackie Sherrill. But did he ever say to you
that it was important to be an Aggie, or really? He
didn't need to. Okay. Now, in fact, we, you know,
and I talked to, when I was at William & Mary, there
was a, I really thought I could have gotten in and
get some back here. Here I was an Aggie. I was not
really proud of my history degree for me. I knew
that I was going to why I thought this. And then I had
a master's from when I was in the Army from
Hardin-Simmons. And it ended up William and Mary,
they were all Ivy Leaguers. And I walked in and saw
John Shelby there. And I walked in the door and he
said, what are you going to write your
dissertation on? What's the topic of your
dissertation? And I didn't even know what he was
talking about. I didn't start talking. Words that
I had not yet formed in my historiography. And I
didn't know how to pronounce it either. And it was
really bad. They said, go over and see Dr. Brown,
Richard Maxwell Brown, over in the library. And I
thought, well, Selby's PhD from Brown. Brown's
PhD from Harvard. I can't talk to a guy from Brown. I
haven't ever talked to a guy from Harvard. And I
went over there, knocked on the door, came in. He
said, oh, you came from Abilene, Texas. I said,
yeah. He said, did you ever know him? high school
football player there named Jack Mildred. Yeah,
yeah, you know him. He showed me another magazine
called Texas Full. He said, I've got every copy
that's ever been printed out of the house here. It
turned out he was a big aficionado for Southwest
Conference and Texas high school football. And
while I'm talking to him, the phone rings. He's the
expert witness on... Extra-legal violence in
support of community values before the select
committee of the Senate. And I knew that couldn't
be hurting this. We're about the same age. He was
looking at me and getting this great compliment
and recognition of his expertise. And we're
talking about this great conversation. So it was
really good there. But it was fun. Way off the
topic. You get discharged. When? I got discharged
on August the 13th. of 46. And back in school
September of 46. And so you're one of those, one of
that large, large group of veterans. 9,000
students. Compare what it was like to arrive in 46
with what it had been like to arrive in 44. I was
coming home. I was coming home to A&M. I felt very
much At home, okay. I literally, while I left home
in 44, I was coming, when I came to A&M, I was coming
home in 46. Were there many of the folks that you had
been with in 44, were many of them back also? Oh,
yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. And what outfit were
you in? I was in a veteran's outfit. I came back I was
a sophomore academically. I signed up and got a
contract in ROTC. I was a junior in ROTC, and I had
senior privileges. All my classmates were
seniors. All the people who come into Fort Worth
were, by now, because of the accelerated program,
seniors. So I was a senior. So for three years, I was
a senior at A&M. But I never was a, with privilege,
never was a sophomore or junior. Freshman to
senior. So where were you assigned in terms of
dormitories? First I was in a veteran's outfit.
And where were you? Then I went over on the core
staff and joined the outfit of our classmate of
mine, Country Higgins, football's four-year
story, football was killed in Korea. Where were
you? We were in the new area, the quad. I moved from
those two buildings right up on Duncan. First
semester I was over here. Second semester I was I
mean, then I moved over to E Infantry and was in
there. But you were in a veteran's outfit, but you
all still marched to chow? No. Oh, you didn't? No.
What did you all wear? I was saying we wore, I wore
the pinks, just what seniors wore, except I never
bought boots. People didn't wear, the seniors
didn't wear the boots in those days the way they do
now. Now, and nobody messed with you veterans? No.
No pranks, no jokes? No. Nothing like that? No, no.
Where did you all eat in the dining hall? Did you eat
as a unit? Well, they changed everything by that
time, too. Because they had so many civilian
veterans here, they had cafeteria style. Oh,
okay. And I think I did that. And the campus was
crammed with people, wasn't it? A campus. The
campus was crammed. They had no campus housing.
They moved, they closed Bryan Air Force Base and
put freshmen out there the next year, I guess. And
it was packed and they had to digest all these
veterans. And the married veterans lived... They
moved in some housing. over there where the Hensel
apartments are in that area there, made
apartments out of old barracks as they moved in
there. They put in a lot of barracks. I don't know if
they did in the war, but they did, exactly. And
over— South of the football field? No. Oh, no. Over
near the water tower? Over near the water tower.
And where the engineer and where the physics, the
cyclotron and all that is over in that area,
generally speaking. And also I took classes over
there. Now, did you and your fellow veteran
buddies feel more mature? We were more mature. We
were more mature. When I came back, classroom work
was like falling off a log. First time, first time I
came back, I was worried about it. I wanted to do
better than I'd done before. I took 15 hours.
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. ROTC drill on
Thursday afternoon. Kept Saturday free as much as
I could. and wanted anything to it. And so you made
good grades. Made good grades, twice, you know.
Who were some of the, you're a history major now.
History major. And who were some of the history
faculty? Well, we had, and I'll use what we called,
I don't know the first name, Screaming Al Nelson.
Wait, and describe why they had those nicknames.
Well, Screaming Al Nelson, Screaming, his first
name was Al, A-L-A-L. And you could hear him
throughout the academic building when he was
teaching. And I did not have him for a lot of
courses, maybe for one course. But you could hear
him all over the building. And one of them did have
Arshter Gaumann. Now, Arshter because he .
They're teaching. And he had a unique way of
teaching that you had a reading assignment. And
you came in, and you'd sit there. He'd ask a
question and call somebody and make a mark in his
thing, in his grade book of some kind, if you
answered the question correctly or not. And
that's the way he talked. I also had a Dr. Hill, who
left here at the University of Texas, who was...
John Hill. Yeah. In retrospect, a good American
historian, and he was one that really challenged
me, I thought. Did you have Ralph Steen? I had him, I
think, for one course. one semester for, I think it
was a government course.